B 1 Cell structure and transport

1.1 The world of the microscope

Learning objectives
After this topic, you should know:
• how microscopy techniques have developed over time
• the differences in magnification and resolution between a light microscope and an electron microscope
• how to calculate the magnification, real size, and image size of a specimen.

Using units
1 kilometre (km) = 1000 metres (m)
1 m = 100 centimetres (cm)
1 cm = 10 millimetres (mm)
1 mm = 1000 micrometres (μm)
1 μm = 1000 nanometres (nm) – so a nanometre is 0.000000001 metres (or written in standard form as 1 × 10⁻⁹ m).

Living things are all made up of cells, but most cells are so small you can only see them using a microscope. It is important to grasp the units used for such tiny specimens before you start to look at them.

The first light microscopes were developed in the mid-17th century. Their development has continued ever since and they are still widely used to look at cells. Light microscopes use a beam of light to form an image of an object and the best can magnify around 2000 times (×2000), although school microscopes usually only magnify several hundred times. They are relatively cheap, can be used almost anywhere, and can magnify live specimens (Figures 1 and 2).

The invention of the electron microscope in the 1930s allowed biologists to see and understand more about the subcellular structures inside cells. These instruments use a beam of electrons to form an image and can magnify objects up to around 2,000,000 times. Transmission electron microscopes give 2D images with very high magnification and resolution. Scanning electron microscopes give dramatic 3D images but lower magnifications (Figure 3). Electron microscopes are large, very expensive, and have to be kept in special temperature, pressure, and humidity-controlled rooms.

Calculating magnification
You can calculate the magnification you are using with a light microscope very simply. You multiply the magnification of the eyepiece lens by the magnification of the objective lens. So if your eyepiece lens is ×4 and your objective lens is ×10, your overall magnification is:
4 × 10 = ×40

When you label drawings made using a microscope, make it clear that the magnification you give is the magnification at which you looked at the specimen (e.g., as viewed at ×40).